# Remasters should not exist

This is a very controversial topic and perhaps one that will land me a lot of enemies.  I nonetheless believe that it is imperative to understand the point: the existence of game remasters is a symptom of a larger problem, that will soon become all-encompassing.  It is my firm belief that we as a species have blundered our way to this problem unknowingly, and that we can still fix it...  albeit with a lot of effort, specifically pertaining to unlearning some of the bad habits that we have accumulated.

This rant will prominently feature Nightdive studios as a punching bag.  The reason is twofold.  One is that Nightdive _clearly_ cares much about the games that it remasters, and obviously about game preservation in general.  The second reason is because they are contributing precisely nothing to the solution, and ensuring that the problems which cause many games to become unplayable, are made worse, with the possible exception of the games that _they_ have personally worked on.  It indirectly relieves the people who got us into this mess in the first place, from any form of responsibility, as well as de-values the work done by the fan-bases.  In other words, Nightdive is used as pressure release valve, ensuring that the real problem is never solved, and only somewhat addressing some of the symptoms.

So without further ado.

# Games are art

And I stand by it.  Games can tell stories and convey emotions that you wouldn't be able to experience otherwise.  I can demonstrate this on the example of the original _Deus Ex_ which is art even by the standards of conventional art forms, due to its narrative structure, the fact that it makes one think and astute symbolism (the area which did not get transferred to the modern remakes very well).  I would argue that Star Craft tells a very impersonal unattached story that allows one to retain perspective on the larger things that matter, divorcing oneself from concrete emotions, without simultaneously being completely emotion-free.  It is a narrative experience that is only possibly closely mirrored by the Song of Ice and Fire series, in the sense that it forces the person experiencing the art to not get attached to concrete people, but to still have a sense of right and wrong.   Finally, a common sentiment when Star Trek: Picard season 1 came out was that the Frankenstein's monster narrative as regards synthetic life was handled far better in the Mass Effect series.

As such I stand by the statement that games are art.  Even if your reference point is the mindless narrative-free first-person shooters of the 90's, they have a close  parallel in sculpture, as the three-dimensional environments have a distinct personality to them.  In addition to the obvious appeal to the medium itself and the undeniable experience that is either familiar to the reader of this article, or a crucial missing piece, consider that the staunchest of critics of gaming have themselves contributed to them: George R. R. Martin, perhaps the most important example, given that he is the only one with viable criticism, the fact that he himself contributed to the Elden Ring, speaks volumes to the medium's capabilities.

So why is this important to the question of remasters?

Well, for a few reasons.  Most art is quite accessible from a sensory standpoint.  Mainly, if it is an art gallery all one needs is some eyesight.  It is not even good eyesight, because some forms of art, particularly late works impressionist painters are best appreciated only if the sight has deteriorated somewhat, in line with the deterioration of the eyesight of the artist himself.  Statues are things that can be appreciated by the blind, as is music.

All one needs is the art in front of them.  And to see the The Winter by Pieter Brueghel, one does not need to travel to Amsterdam: copies of it exist, and can even decorate one's home.  Art preservation is thus a simple act of keeping a painting in your house.  Sure, there are museums, and different copies are different in different ways.  Some copies retain a lot of material which was in contact with the author, but most paintings have to be restored.  The thing that is being called the original and is posted in Musee D'Orsay is no more the original, than a very good copy made by a professional artist.  The vast inflation in the price of art is the only reason why your Lautrec is different to the one in the museum, is that the snobs believe that their ship of theseus has more connection to the work of the author than yours does.  For all intents and purposes the _art_ of those art pieces is completely identical.

Film is a slightly more modern (on historical time-scale, very very recent), form of art that has slightly different requirements for preservation.  Film deteriorates faster than paintings do.  Not faster than many of the crafts that we haven't preserved, there's some survivor's bias going on, but still faster than one can antiicipate.  Furthermore, the form in which film is being preserved is in flux comparable to that of the early renaissance.  So, preserving film at the end of the 20-th century meant preserving a bunch of reels in a mine.  Preserving film today, most likely only involves preserving a few digital files, that take up a fraction of the space, and are completely lossless if preserved correctly.  We now know, as well, that since we can make lossless copies of recordings of Richter playing in Vienna, or the masters of Star Trek: The Next Generation, that preserving is not a  matter of guarding well a single copy, but rather ensuring that the copies are proliferated well, and that there are no self-imposed losses.  Digital storage is abundant, cheap and universal.

Art preservation, particularly digital art, whose abstract nature
inherently kes preservation easy and controllable,  is a solved problem.  Sure, we can't exactly convert the Starry Night into a JPEG and call it a day, because the brush strokes retain a lot of information, but with enough effort, it is possible to produce a digital clone of the painting that retains everything that an art snob would consider important, and ignore everything else.  True that scan might take up as much space as the original painting, if stored on outdated hardware, if sufficiently detailed and sufficiently poorly compressed; but that scan can be sent very quickly via the internet, and reproduce the exact same painting halfway across the globe.  If there is a fire, you have  a backup from which it is possible to restore the "original".

But despite the advances in technology, we still have a problem with game preservation.  And while the reasons are quite similar to those of film, the imposition of additional restrictions by less than intelligent individuals, has resulted in games becoming a lossy medium that is for some reason harder to preserve than decaying dying organic material attached to a mutilated corpse of a plant with ostensibly imperfect checmicals.  And believe it or not, egg-based paint has more longevity than Doom.

But why is that.

# A brief history of Nightdive studios

This, much like any good story began with a bit of frustration with the status quo.  One regular person was on a trip, and lo and behold they couldn't play their favourite good-old-game, System Shock.

There are a multitude of reasons for why you can't play system shock these days.  The game is old, and I'm not just referrring to the fact that it's old fashioned or has accumulated a lot of technical differences: the way it was written has a few assumptions about the underlying hardware that no longer hold true.  It is  a game that didn't do too well either.  It didn't give its authors the confidence to make their game engine open source, as was common with Id Tech games, and the game wasn't super profitable to make the original publishers stay afloat, or this particular IP to be their prized possession.

As a consequence, if you want to play the original System Shock, you _could_ still do it, but you'd have to jump through a lot of hoops.  The systems for which it was built no longer exist, and it is not quite easy to reverse engineer what it was meant to do...  Or at least not as easy as with other games, given how unconventional the game was, and how different its engine.

So naturally, there was some idea that it would be possible to bring those games into the 21st century.  That it would be possible to update the assets and game engine, without affecting the core gameplay.  And Nightdive stuios was largely inspired by that goal.

Their roster of games is quite interesting, and I should probably talk about the specifics of how they do what they do.  Their first foray into remaster territory was of course System Shock 2 in 2013, which was released on Steam and was the best, at the time, way to play that game.  They had also fixed up I have no Mouth and I Must Scream, and a few other smaller titles.  This was done largely in an effort to bring those games back to life from the dead.

The reality of the way in which it had to be argued is quite revealing: one had to email the rights holders of the "intellectual" property in question.  Naturally this includes almost nobody involved in the original game, and a bunch of suits and CEOs.  The argument was not "we should preserve these games for the sake of preservation", but "there are N people who have wishlisted this game on GOG or Steam, and a re-release would be profitable".  Naturally, this **very much** is the case with System Shock.  In fact, up until very recently I was salivating over the System Shock remake done by Nightdive, and this particular remake re-contextualised why I think Nightdive isn't helping.


# A world without remasters

System shock is far from the only game that came out during that time, that people would like to play and play religiously.  I have played Blood, Quake 1, Quake  2, FreeSpace, Half Life and quite a few other games from that same era.  But these were games I could play for the longest time, thanks to one particular peculiarity.

Half Life, is very much a brainchild of Valve.  It is their roots.  And unlike many other companies, (ahem, Epicfail, ahem), they respect where they came from, to the point of continuously updating the game.  Sure, it is quite a fallacy to believe that these updates were universally an improvement, but one cannot deny that they could play a reasonable approximation of Half Life on modern hardware for the vast majority of its existence.  This was not free of blunders, like making the "HD" models not just the default, but the only way to play the game, and the infamous Half Life Source, that wasn't nearly as broken initially as it was by the end of its miserable existence.

But thankfully, Valve also respected others imitating and replicating their work.  Black Mesa, was a free mod for the Source Engine, that allowed one to play through the vast majority of the good parts of Half Life.  I distinctly remember liking that mod a lot more than I ended up liking the retail game, but that has laregly everything to do with the fact that Valve had a clearer understanding of games, than the Crowbar collective.  Still, having the option to play a pretty-much-fan remake of Half Life, is a good one to have.

With Half life, one had the GoldSource version that was faithful-enough and came from Valve directly, in fact more faithful with the latest patch.  The Source version which was hopelessly broken, but was nonetheless a somewhat of an upgrade at the time it came out.  The Source fan-made mod, which was a short, but faithful adaptation.  And a Source-based remake; one which is less broken than the official Valve product, has some direct upgrades, and some blunders for good measure.  Still, one cannot say in 2024, that it is impossible to play Half Life, in fact one is spoiled for **choice**.

Still another game from a similarly long bygone era, is freespace (1&2) from 1998 and 1999 respectively.  It is a game with quite a lot of depth and a surprising amount of emotional investment for what is ostensibly a slightly sci-fi military piloting simulator.  It's a fun game, that I quite liked when it was modern.  Thankfully, I can still play it.  The reason is the hard light project.  The basics of it come down to: the source code for the program is open.  The so-called MediaVPs are not, but you can, if you own the game, refurbish the assets and play them with the new engine.  And in some cases there are improved and upscaled (manually) assets.  The game has a plethora of gameplay improvements.  The number-based command dispatch was replaced with Windows speech recognition, a feature that I used quite extensively.  There are multiple campaigns, and multiple missions packs that could be run on the same engine.  The game is just fun in ways in which the original could not be.  With freespace the game is preserved by virtue of being **open**.

With Quake, the situation is even more interesting.  When the game was completed, the Source code for it was released under the GPL; the best license for free software.  There are a few contributing factors to why Quake is such a wonderful game to keep updated to run on modern hardware.  Firstly the game code is relatively small.  It was one of the earliest game engines, so the amount of code that needs to be ported is itself small.  Secondly, the code itself is of good quality.  Sure it's C code, which imposes some limitations on what can be done effectively with it, but it is very good C code.  The third aspect is that Quake's source code had been available for a very long time.  The latest GPL release had been out for 13 years.  There were previous releases long enough so that code modifications could be lost.  So where we are now, very much falls into the previous two.  However, it should be noted that Quake to a far greaterextent was designed to foster the creativity of its userbase.  Even before the source code had been released, great effort was taken to ensure that the game was easy to modify, easy to create with and within the confines of its genre, created the necessary preconditions for the creation of the aforementioned Half Life.   FreeSpace was not as forthcoming, despite the premise being more suitable, the malleability of it was less, by virtue of its fanbase being much smaller.

These games were in no need of a remaster, and they lived on because they were good, but also because their creators had made the decisions that made these games a permanent fixture of modern society.  There are calculators running Doom, which is a far cry from the IBM PCs that they were intended to run on.  Meanwhile getting something like Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood to run on the intended platform is a challenge; so games preservation is also very much a function of the game that is being preserved.

So let us now turn to yet another example of a game that has been preserved well.  Quake 2, which for some unfathomable reason is not called Wor, is a game that had been used to demonstrate the effects of Ray tracing and path tracing.

The reason why it was chosen was threefold: it was a game with an aesthetic that could support the kind of lighting that nVidia wanted to show off.  Secondly its models were sufficiently simple, so that path tracing was not prohibitively expensive.  Thirdly, and perhaps most importantly, the code was GPL, meaning that nVidia would have been capable of adding on their RTX renderer, wityhout fear of some of their competitors taking advantage of the code, although RTX itself being proprietary opened a whole other can of worms that GPL could have exacerbated.  Nonetheless, the kind of game that Quake 2 RTX ended up being is quite an interesting conundrum.

On the one hand, there  is a popular opinion that Quake 2 RTX veers too far away from the art style of Quake 2, and if RTX were considered an official remaster, or _e.g._ a replacement for the Quake 2 that one can play via Steam, or by using the retail CD, I'd argue that mayhaps this would be a valid critique.  But it is also an **experimental** title.  It is a test of how well, can the new features integrate into an older engine, and how much work would need to be done to do so.  The reason why that in and of itself is a good thing should be obvious, but in case it is not, consider that in some games, screen space reflections are so well-tuned that it is difficult to tell if path tracing is applied at all.  Yet, we can experience Quake 2 in that way too!  How fun!

So do these games need officially licenced remasters?  I believe not, and I would argue that this imposes an evolutionary selection criterion: if you want your game to last longer, make it open source, make it replay-able and give players choices as to how to experience it.  If you don't, your game will disappear.  Simple as that.

# Rebastardisation

We should talk a little about the process of remastering and how good intentions lead to inferior results.

The first remaster that I thought about getting was that of Homeworld 1&2.  It is a game that I enojyed very much when I was but a boy, and for quite good reasons.  The game was ingenious, and despite the derision for the sequel, a very interesting experience.

And the remaster looked amazing when it first came out.  I spent a lot of days playing the campaign, still more playing instant action and figuring out that despite my best efforts, the AI was plain unfair.

So was it a good remaster.  For the longest time I thought so.  It did a lot to upscale the textures, it added some features that were missing from the original.  I did like a few things, but there were decidedly problems with the way the games worked in the new engines.

The first game was affected the worst, the original Homeworld 1 had a very peculiar balancing, wherein the hit-check was based on a physical calculation.  It was replaced with a random number generator.  So as you can imagine ships that used to do very well in groups, like the guns on some large craft were no longer capable of shooting down fighters...  which makes the peculiar balancing even more favourable towards smaller craft.

Another problem I found was that the lines were re-recorded.  Homeworld 1 feels largely the same, as if alternative takes were used, but with no major differences.  Homeworld 2, however, feels like a different game.  Fleet intelligence in particular was a different character altogether whose lines no longer agreed with the delivery.   In fact, it is rather challenging to tell whether the line delivery was off, or just the perception of the radically different voice... Does it make it a bad remaster?  I suppose not.  But it does make it harder to recommend.

## Blood

This is a game that is largely in the same camp as Quake and Freespace, despite the source code not being available, the widely revered build engine was reverse engineered in more than one way.  There was Blood GDX, made with Java, and nBlood which was written in C++.  Both were fan-made projects with quite a bit of good faith and a decent amount of performance too.

And then the nightdive remake came out.  And it was ...  well, it was certainly a remake, the game didn't look particularly better than either `nblood` or Blood GDX.  It had a Vulkan renderer, and a few other goodies, but to be quite frank, it wasn't particularly good.  It was certainly a way to experience blood, because it didn't require as much work to be done on Windows.

But I should also mention this.  I'm a GNU Linux user.  I do this because the kind of work that I requires one to know how that operating system works and being submerged into that ecosystem, makes economical use of my time.  I had always adored the fact that games that had their source code reverse engineered or available, or in fact, open, worked on Linux quite well.  Despite the many problems Blood GDX had that.  `nblood`, despite being written in a lower level language, was also capable of running on my machine without any translation.  The nightdive port could not.

Tell, me is that entitlement to expect people who have a full-time job, to produce something of at least quality parity as someone who had been doing the port in their spare time?  One may well argue that asking for Linux support is asking for too much...  And I may well argue that if someone did it for free, with better performance, and with some additional advantages, like the fact that the game wasn't broken in many crucial ways, and on top of all of that, did so without access to any of the original assets, I suppose that it may also well be argued that Nightdive is not particularly competent.

## The Quake 1 remaster

This is probably the most interesting remaster to cover.  From an outsider's perspective, it is a faithful remaster, which added co-opeartive multiplayer, remastered the game with good performance, while adding features such as dynamic lighting, among other graphical features, added in many of the official expansions, if not all of them, and to add more to the package, they made sure that the game retained many of the features that made other modifications work.  And added a horde mode.

Well, almost.  The story modifications that didn't made any changes to the source code do in fact work.  But most other things, like _e.g._ Quake 1.5, naturally don't work anymore.

While the game is decidedly better than the original retail release, I'd argue that a lot had been lost.  Due to the source code for the Kex engine not being freely available, the mods are limited to those that utilise the base quake code.  So no fancy guns for you.

Secondly, I may be the only one irritated by the fact that a game that should load instantaneously, even if in a heavily modified engine with extreme upscaled assets, loads for a few minutes, and tries to connect to Bugthesda.net.

Another problem that stems from the fact that Kex is not publicly available, is that it doesn't work as well on GNU Linux.  For example the fancy co-op doesn't, despite many fan-made mods for the original quake doing that just fine.  The game is a windows-only executable.

The horde mode, being official is quite a peculiar thing...  I almost remember there being some mod that did almost exactly that.

None of what Nightdive achieved couldn't have been done by someone else.  In fact, arguably, the `darkplaces` engine is far better in terms of added graphical features.  It has true model interpolation, unlike Kex.  And sure it is unfair to compare a game engine that is the product of one fan working in their off-time, to an entire game studio that specialises in remasters, so I should perhaps shut up.  As someone who worked on both `darkplaces` and `vkquake` **and** the `rtx` version of YamagiQuake, I should probably do the opposite.

There is a lot that is lost.  We have taken something that had largely become a fan-made fan-supported work, and turned it coporate again.  Despite the perception that corporate interference can make things better, it did not.  We grew up under the perception that corporate has more resources, and all they lacked was true passion, but that is not the case.  Corporate values and guidelines spoil the product, no matter if there was passion and resources.

What is interesting is that there is a way out of it.  Ironwail a port that I admire quite a bit.  It is a particularly interesting source port: it can take advantage of the few goodies that were introduced in the remaster, but is still nonetheless a fine regular vanilla experience.  It takes advantage of the new content, an easy way to retrieve the complete vanilla assets, but not much else.  Just use modern OpenGL to improve the frame-rate, add mouse look and allow the user to bind more keys to more functions and you're golden.

What's interesting is that Ironwail is made by a single programmer.  This doesn't necessarily needs to lead to a conclusion on your part that Nightdive programmers are incompetent.  Just that the approach of taking an old game and putting it into a new engine is often more trouble than just fixing the old (and well made) game engine.

## Black messa

There are two games that were in the zeitgeist of the Half life community.  They are both an interesting re-imagining of the situation at the Black Mesa research complex, with an interesting shift in perspective on the already known protagonist, that was overshadowed by technical limitations, misguided use of assets, a story which is only tolerable because of its link to the original Half Life, spotty voice acting largely due to poor direction, and occasionally obtuse level design, failing to update that which needed to be changed, and changing what was fine.  While Black Mesa, being the less interesting of the two, is considered a "faithful adaptation".  Hunt Down the Freeman, is considered a failure, despite there being quite a few positives.  The game attempts to push the boundaries of both the Source engine and the Half Life narrative.

So what would be a fair assessment in this case?  Firstly, I must say that I differentiate between a free mod made by people who are just learning how to design games, from what was released as a fully paid game in 2020.  Once you charge for your work, the standard to which you are held is different.  What I would call one of the best mods of 2009, I would consider a mediocre game, that largely coasts on the works of prior giants.

Let's begin by observing that games are an interactive medium.  Black Mesa is what one would imagine playing through Half Life 1 maps with the Half Life 2 Gordon to be, if he were fighting Half Life 2 combine instead of the HECU, Half Life 2 headcrabs instead of Half Life 1 ones, antlion workers instead of bullsquid, and the HL2 vortigaunts voiced by Barney suddenly became hostile, and you had female scientists.

The problem is that Half Life 2 and Half Life 1 are radically different games.  They are not more of the same, despite many of the macro elements of Half Life 1 carrying over to Half Life 2.  This is something that the Half Life 2 team is acutely aware of, hence why a considerable amount of work now known as the Half Life 2 beta is cut.  Half Life 2 is a game about war in a variety of locations.  Half Life 1 is a science fiction novel of the time period done in an interactive medium.  So the engine sensibilities of Half Life 2, do not map well onto Half Life 1.

First, the level design.  Half Life is easy to navigate compared to many of its contemporaries, but a lot of lessons were learned during its production.  Half Life 2 is much easier to parse, as it is much more attentive towards the player.  It knows how to nudge the player in the right direction.  HDTF is a game where this concept is just not recognised.  Black Mesa makes _some attempt_ to follow the same rules, but often falls short.  Case in point, "Power Up" is a chapter where Black Mesa recognised the importance of directing the player's attention.  It fumbled the fact that no sane player would go towards the place of origin of Gargantua, and why Valve opened the door next to Gargantua instead.  I am a fan of the moodier lighting, but not sold on the changes made to Residue Processing.

Why cut reasonably good puzzles in On a Rail, but _keep_ the frustrating platforming and even more questionable signposting.  They started with perfectly good levels and ended up with a clear case of Hunt-down-the-Freeman-itis, where you are lead on by a fleeing guard into a complete dead end.  The only way to find the right way forward without using a guide is to get frustrated and search every inch, before backtracking all the way to the point of no return and noticing some peculiarity in the architecture.  If like Hunt Down the Freeman, these same level designers had no template to start from, there's a good chance that the end result would have been comparable.

The original Half Life is a game that doesn't exactly take its premise too seriously.  Gordon is a glorified lab rat.  He's probably not too bright because most of the career theoreticians that I've met can't pull off half the acrobatic manoeuvres that Gordon can.  In America, Gordon being able to proficiently reload an MP5 is probably not too much of a stretch, but the amount of weapons that he carries is beyond the realm of plausibility.  It's not a super-realistic game, and so the gun-play veers much closer to fun.  Crowbar Collective seem not to have gotten the memo.

Obviously they could have tried a few of the things that valve themselves experimented with: they could have tried introducing a three-four weapon limit, or one weapon per-category, (which Hunt Down the Freeman did, but not too successfully).  They could have experimented with making the game more systemic, so that satchels and mines are more of a necessity (which is kinda what the original Half Life was all about).  They could have embraced the goofy nature of the game, and perhaps make the game a bit more fun, with quick swapping weapons, more responsive gun-play, and maybe remembering that the Spas-12 is _primarily an automatic shotgun_.  Instead, you get a game, where explosives are less reliable due to the clutter in the levels, the guns are downgraded, you get iron-sights, but only for the _357 magnum_, you lug the entire arsenal with you, despite using most of that arsenal being suicide for most of the rest of the game, and things like Rocket launchers being useless for most of the game.

Even the justification is only on paper.  There were people who asked if iron-sights could be implemented for all guns (and I admit it's probably a controversial topic, but my _personal opinion_ is that it would make the gun-play a bit more immersive), they stated that they didn't want to make later guns like the MP5 overshadow the earlier guns like the Glock.  If you played the game, you probably know that the MP5 is many things but not _less_ accurate than the random spread slow firing rate weapon that is only marginally better than the crowbar at killing headcrabs, if you haven't nailed the timing.  This wasn't the case in the original Half Life, both because the damage output for the 9mm was respectable, and also because you couldn't one-hit-kill headcrabs.  The fundamental misunderstanding here is that in Half Life, a 90s shooter, the main enemies, the HECU grunts, couldn't shoot and move at the same time.  This has profound implications, because it made it plausible that one could shoot a grunt at a range where the Glock's increased accuracy gave it enough of an advantage to take down grunts ammo-efficiently.

Instead, in Black Mesa's balance, the Glock is a useless weapon.  The MP5 overshadows everything else, because it is both accurate (given you understand the recoil doesn't add random spread), has abundant ammunition, and is the only weapon that isn't complete suicide to use against grunts.  The shotgun doesn't reliably kill HECU, doesn't reliably kill vorts, and has the firing rate of a real PhD in Physics using a real pump action shotgun, in a game balanced around the MP5.  And you're telling me, that the reason why you only have iron-sights for one gun, is because you think it would ruin the _balance_ of your game?

What's interesting is that Hunt Down the Freeman is actually not that terrible in that respect.  They have an inventory system, and you get one gun per category.  In the newest update the gun you get at the beginning of the level, is usually the right tool for the job.  And they tried something.  They didn't do it well, but at least they tried.  Black Mesa simply needed to follow the old encounter design, and they managed to make surgical adjustments that made the balance worse.  This isn't exactly' crowbar's fault, they took the combine, and adapted them to HECU.  The only thing similar between the marines and the combine soldiers is that they are bipedal and use standard humanoid weaponry.  They couldn't be further apart from each other.  Making them work, would veer the weapon balancing much closer to the Half Life 2 balancing, and to some extent that had been attempted, Half Life 2 does have a useless pistol.  But it was not done well, because the shotgun is worse, the SMG is much better, and the energy weapons don't exactly wipe the floor with the rest of the guns, even when you have the ammo for them.

And then there is the tone deafness.  On its own the soundtrack for Black Mesa is a wonderful piece of art.  I listen to it, when I don't play the game.  But in context of where it is used, it doesn't fit at all.  Crowbar collective fundamentally misunderstands Kelly Bailey's soundtrack, it's not meant to evoke any particular emotion, it is a texture that is ambiguous and doesn't dictate what you should feel.  Adrenaline horror suits a triumphant Gordon pulling off cool stunts just as well as a scared Gordon being shot at from mortars cowering in the corner.  Sirens in the distance is an ambient cosmic track.  Space Ocean fits the feeling of emptiness that the early Gordon that just came out of the test chamber feels.  And it suits the exploration well.  Drums and Riffs doesn't exactly convey anything beyond Gordon is moving somewhere.  The only part that is remotely similar to what Joel Nielsen has done is Diabolical Adrenaline Guitar.  This leads to the music being largely in the background and encounter design dictating the mood.  At times, it's possible to forget that Half Life does actually have a soundtrack, and that parts of what seemed to be the ambient atmosphere are actually music.  The few times the Music does get your adrenaline pumping, so to speak, are the situations where you are on the surface, and facing impossible odds in a warzone.

Contrast this with how music is used in Black Mesa.  Blast Pit is sad music that plays when you burn down blind tentacle monster.  You should be moving slowly and quietly, instead the music pushes you to move fast.  Questionable ethics makes you feel like a human tank.  That is the most surefire way to get killed and reset.  Forget about freeman is used roughly as well as Nuclear Mission Jam, but has a decidedly faster rhythm for a decidedly slower encounter.  Surface Tension 4 is just baffling, to be quite honest.  It'd fit the scenes of a warzone, because then at least it would convey that you are, in fact, witnessing your own kind being decimated by an alien force.  Instead the track is used for a section where the player is likely to want to think and move slowly.  Apprehension perhaps fits somewhat.  Though sadly, its best part simply wouldn't fit the timing.  The music is not universally a bad fit, but it needed a lot more polish to fit well.  If the game were slightly different, sure, all of these tracks would have fit, especially if parts of them were looped, parts were cut out, and parts were made part of the ambient sound.  As it stands, there is a considerable shortfall between what is and what could have been and what is.

Now do I hate this game in general?  No.  It's a fine game.  Not perfect, derivative and unpolished, but still something that I wanted to play on my Steam Deck, and something I occasionally replay.  However, there is a worrying trend of people stating that Black Mesa is the ultimate way of experiencing the Half Life story.  Do I really need to elaborate on why that assertion is preposterous?

Even if the game didn't have glaring tonal and gameplay problems, the fact of the matter is, the game is not the original Half Life.  The best way to experience that game, is to experience the _exact_ way it was designed.  Cartooned graphics, implausible premise, MP5s that have 50 round magazines, and theoretical physicists that are fitter than marines are less dissonant cognitively speaking, if the implausibility follows a certain common background level, rather than having spikes in some few areas.  Plus a few of these things are forgivable, given the time period.  Half Life came out at a time where par for the course was very different to what it is now.  Games were considered a far less serious medium.  So while some occasional problems are forgivable for Half Life in the 90s, the perspective is different in the 2020s.

Crowbar collective is largely aware of this issue, which is likely why they severely shortened "On a Rail", and completely restructured the border world chapters.  The fact that most scientists have the same voice, and the _one exception_, might as well say "Stanley was a highly trained professional so he didn't need to hear all this", is kind of a problem.  Exasperating this problem is that the voice actor for Barney and the G-Man, does not have the range of Mike Shapiro.  The choice to have multiple characters still be voiced by him in Half Life 2 was also accompanied by the citizens being voiced by someone else, and Alyx and Judith and Breen and Eli being voiced by people who don't play other parts.  There was even a father Grigori who wasn't even meant to be an American.  And it would make sense for Black Mesa to have more than just Americans, wouldn't it.

So where does that leave us?  Black Mesa serves only one purpose.  It is an alternative take that serves to remind us what made the original iconic.  It is not competitive with the original Half Life; it is not meant to be.  What I can clearly say that it is a game that should exist, and it may have been worse off had it not had the guidance of the original Half Life's script and level cohesion.  I believe that the team behind Hunt Down the Freeman was equally talented, but since they did not have the same creative direction as Black Mesa, they were at a disadvantage, and their failings are more obvious.  So in effect, a game that tried to do more, and tried to be its own thing, was punished for it.

What is even more frustrating is the question of how much was added by Crowbar collective?  The end product is a 90% good game, 80% of which is just Valve's ideas, repackaged.  Does Crowbar deserve credit for the difference between Half Life: Source and Black Mesa, or the difference between Black Mesa and Half Life?  These are not questions I believe have definitive answers, but questioning these premises will lead you to question the premise of remasters in general.

## System Shock

This is an interesting review.  Of all the games that are on this list, System Shock is not one from my past.  I have actually played through the remaster first.

And here's my overall impression with the game: it's fine.  It's not terribly or anything but there are just some areas where there is unnecessary cognitive load.  The game is not particularly plausible.  You have both a quick load/save mechanic and for some reason a respawn mechanic.  You have levels, which can be considered M. C. Escher's impression of a real space, with completely non-sensible design aspects.  It doesn't exactly feel complex as a result of the space filling many purposes, it feels as if the complexity was added to pad the game.  Unlike _e.g._ Prey (2017), the spaces blur together, and navigating them is quite difficult, because they all look identical.  Compared to Dead Space, which had both diegetic objective summaries and markers, but didn't need them, System Shock has audio logs.  Mercifully, unlike Doom 3, these audio logs have a textual representation, so one does not need to trudge through sighs and extraneous information in order to remember where to go and what to do.  Like Prey, some locks have pass-codes.  Unlike Prey, where only one particular puzzle required you to remember a pass-code and the rest simply showed up in your UI, in System Shock, you kinda need to have a pen and paper.  You don't know which deck to go next, and you can backtrack through the entire ship and are occasionally asked to do so.  As a consequence, the game almost completely blurs together.  There isn't exactly progression.  You just find stuff laying around and you do some busywork.  You thought Isaac Clarke was kind of a pushover for people to boss him around, wait until you figure out that the hacker follows the bidding of dead people...  and gets rewarded with employment at TriOptimum for it!

Now, obviously the previous summary is either preposterous for you, or a completely accurate representation of the game.  Both are true, but the reason to have one perspective or the other is as follows.

If all your prior exposure to gaming is through immersive simulations, systemic games, such as BioShock, and Prey (working title PsychoShock), then you find System Shock rather disappointing.  The base game loop and narrative had been refined over the years.  The narrative in particular is System Shock's weakest point.  The AI Frankenstein's monster is done to death, particularly in the year 2024.  The players of BioShock, Dishonored and Prey would expect more refined gameplay mechanics.  And in Dead Space, the atmosphere is done much better.  And in general System Shock is so influential that almost any game these days has some design elements borrowed from it.  To any modern gamer the design is baroque, the story unrefined and levels unnecessarily obtuse.  An oft cited comment is that modern gamers are too accustomed to objectives and objective markers; why are there no complaints about Black Mesa?
